BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023

CHAPTER I — PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, commencement and application.
This Sanhita may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Section 2. Definitions.
In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires the following words and expressions are used in the following senses. The word "act" denotes as well a series of acts as a single act. The word "omission" denotes as well a series of omissions as a single omission.

CHAPTER II — PUNISHMENTS

Section 4. Punishments.
The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Sanhita are: death, imprisonment for life, imprisonment which is of two descriptions, namely rigorous imprisonment and simple imprisonment, forfeiture of property, and fine.

Section 6. Fraction of terms of punishment.
In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty years.

CHAPTER III — GENERAL EXCEPTIONS

Section 14. Act done by a person bound by law.
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.

Section 17. Act of a child under seven years of age.
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.

Section 18. Act of a child above seven and under twelve years of age.
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.

CHAPTER VI — OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE

Section 147. Waging war against the Government of India.
Whoever wages war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 148. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by Section 147.
Whoever within or without India conspires to commit any of the offences punishable by Section 147 shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

CHAPTER VII — OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE

Section 152. Assault or obstruction of public servant when suppressing riot.
Whoever assaults or obstructs any public servant in the discharge of his duty in suppressing a riot or an affray, or uses, or threatens, or attempts to use criminal force to such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

CHAPTER X — OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC TRANQUILITY

Section 189. Unlawful assembly.
An assembly of five or more persons is designated an unlawful assembly, if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is to overawe by criminal force or show of criminal force the Central Government or any State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State.

Section 190. Being member of unlawful assembly.
Whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful assembly.

CHAPTER XI — OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE

Section 213. Giving false evidence.
Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by any express provision of law to state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, is said to give false evidence.

CHAPTER XIII — OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

Section 267. Using false weights or measures.
Whoever uses any false weight or false measure of length or capacity, or fraudulently uses any weight or any measure of length or capacity as a different weight or measure from what it is, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

CHAPTER XIV — OFFENCES AFFECTING LIFE

Section 99. Culpable homicide.
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

Section 100. Murder.
Culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused.

Section 101. Punishment for murder.
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. If the offence is committed by a group of five or more persons on the grounds of race, caste, community, sex, place of birth, language or personal belief, each member shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life and fine.

Section 103. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.

Section 109. Hurt.
Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt.

Section 115. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is grievous hurt, is said to voluntarily cause grievous hurt.

CHAPTER XV — OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

Section 63. Rape.
A man is said to commit rape if he penetrates his penis to any extent into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person without her consent or against her will. The punishment for rape shall be rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 64. Punishment for rape.
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 74. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and with fine.

CHAPTER XVI — CRIMINAL FORCE AND ASSAULT

Section 118. Assault.
Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault.

CHAPTER XVII — WRONGFUL RESTRAINT AND WRONGFUL CONFINEMENT

Section 125. Wrongful restraint.
Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to restrain that person.

CHAPTER XVIII — KIDNAPPING, ABDUCTION, SLAVERY AND FORCED LABOUR

Section 137. Kidnapping.
(1) Kidnapping from India means conveying any person beyond the limits of India without the consent of that person, or of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that person. (2) Kidnapping from lawful guardianship means taking or enticing any minor under sixteen years of age if a male, or under eighteen years of age if a female, or any person of unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such guardian.

CHAPTER XIX — THEFT

Section 303. Theft.
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.

Section 304. Punishment for theft.
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 308. Extortion.
Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property or valuable security, or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security, commits extortion.

CHAPTER XX — CRIMINAL BREACH OF TRUST

Section 316. Criminal breach of trust.
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits criminal breach of trust.

CHAPTER XXI — RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY

Section 317. Dishonestly receiving stolen property.
Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

CHAPTER XXII — CHEATING

Section 318. Cheating.
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat.

CHAPTER XXIII — ORGANISED CRIME

Section 111. Organised crime.
(1) Whoever commits organised crime shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine of not less than ten lakh rupees. (2) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit or advocates, abets, advises or incites or knowingly facilitates the commission of an organised crime or any act preparatory to organised crime shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine of not less than five lakh rupees. (3) Whoever harbours or conceals any member of an organised crime syndicate shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than three years but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 112. Petty organised crime.
Whoever, being a member of a group or gang, commits theft, snatching, cheating, unauthorised selling of tickets, unauthorised betting or gambling, selling of obscene material, supply of narcotics, or kidnapping shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and also be liable to fine.

CHAPTER XXIV — OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS

Section 336. Forgery.
Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or to any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits forgery.

CHAPTER XXV — MISCHIEF

Section 324. Mischief.
Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits mischief.

CHAPTER XXVI — CRIMINAL TRESPASS

Section 329. Criminal trespass.
Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property, or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence, is said to commit criminal trespass.