CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973

CHAPTER I — PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It extends to the whole of India.

Section 2. Definitions.
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, bailable offence means an offence shown as bailable in the First Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force. Non-bailable offence means any other offence. Charge includes any head of charge when the charge contains more than one head.

CHAPTER III — POWER OF COURTS

Section 26. Courts by which offences are triable.
Subject to the other provisions of this Code, any offence under the Indian Penal Code may be tried by the High Court, or the Court of Session, or any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable.

CHAPTER IV — ARREST OF PERSONS

Section 41. When police may arrest without warrant.
Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been so concerned.

Section 41A. Notice of appearance before police officer.
The police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 41, issue a notice directing the person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, to appear before him or at such other place as may be specified in the notice.

Section 46. Arrest how made.
In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by word or action. If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all means necessary to effect the arrest.

Section 50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail.
Every police officer or other person arresting any person without a warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest. Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange for sureties on his behalf.

Section 56. Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station.
A police officer making an arrest without a warrant shall, without unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge of a police station.

CHAPTER V — BAIL

Section 436. In what cases bail to be taken.
When any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail. Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, may, instead of taking bail from such person, discharge him on his executing a bond without sureties for his appearance.

Section 437. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence.
When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of Session, he may be released on bail. Provided that a person who is alleged to have committed an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life shall not be released on bail.

Section 437A. Bail to require accused to appear before the next appellate Court.
Before conclusion of the trial and before disposal of the appeal, the Court trying the offence or the Appellate Court shall require the accused to execute bail bonds with sureties, to appear before the higher Court as and when such Court issues notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the judgment and in default of such bail bonds being furnished by the accused, he shall be committed to jail.

Section 438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.
Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be released on bail.

Section 439. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail.
A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of section 437, may impose any condition which it considers necessary for the purposes mentioned in that sub-section.

CHAPTER VI — PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE

Section 61. Form of summons.
Every summons issued by a Court under this Code shall be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court.

Section 62. Summons how served.
Every summons shall be served by a police officer, or subject to such rules as the State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other public servant. The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person summoned, by delivering or tendering to him one of the duplicates of the summons.

CHAPTER VII — PROCESSES TO COMPEL PRODUCTION OF THINGS

Section 91. Summons to produce document or other thing.
Whenever any Court or any officer in charge of a police station considers that the production of any document or other thing is necessary or desirable for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code by or before such Court or officer, such Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to the person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed to be, requiring him to attend and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place stated in the summons or order.

CHAPTER XII — INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE

Section 154. Information in cognizable cases.
Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant. Every such information shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf.

Section 161. Examination of witnesses by police.
Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.

Section 167. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours.
(1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by section 57, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well-founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter prescribed relating to the case, and shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may, whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused in such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole. The total period of detention cannot exceed ninety days where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years, and sixty days in any other case.

CHAPTER XXI — SUMMARY TRIALS

Section 260. Power to try summarily.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code any Chief Judicial Magistrate, Metropolitan Magistrate, or any Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court, may, if he thinks fit, try in a summary way all or any of the following offences: offences not punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.